README.md, before:

# Grid_Synth
Driver code for a web-based synthesizer written in p5.js

## Using the app
As it stands, this application has been tested on both Google Chrome and Microsoft Edge browsers. In theory, any web browset that supports the
[Web Audio API](https://caniuse.com/audio-api) and [P5.js](https://github.com/processing/p5.js/blob/main/contributor_docs/supported_browsers.md)
should be able to use the application without problems. 

## Controls
The application supports several user interactions. 
#### PLAYING NOTES 
Pressing any key on your computer keyboard will trigger a note. On the top row, keys from "1" to "=" will work, on the second, "q" to "]", on the third, 
"a" to "'", and on the fourth, "z" to "/". The layout of a typical keyboard makes playing notes somewhat annoying, so if you have an ortholinear 
keyboard, definitely break it out here. 
#### FILTER CONTROLS
Pressing the space bar will trigger the filter envelope manually (as will playing a note while the envelope is engaged). Additionally, the arrow keys control 
filter parameters - up/down control the cutoff and left/right control the resonance (left is less, right is more). 
#### OTHER CONTROLS
Sliders can be used to control the ADSR envelopes attached to the amp and filter, as well as the effects. The user can also use dropdown menus to select the core
waveform of the synthesizer, as well as change the fundamental pitch (the pitch of the note which bears the label "0")in an input box. The other inputs are for the 
cardinality (the number of tones to the octave), and the "harmonicity" and "metaharmonicity" of the system, which are terms that bear some explanation in the next section. 

## What in god's name is going on here??
In this section, I will outline the basic algorithm for deciding which frequency is being played by an oscillator when a user hits a key on the keyboard. The 
following explanation does very little to engage with *why* the operations are taking place, but this will be adressed in an upcoming thesis in the Dartmouth 
department of music. 

First off, the code checks what the number in the "cardinality" input box is (we'll call it N), and splits the interval from the fundamental frequency 
to the note an octave above it into N equally-spaced intervals. This creates an N-TET (N-tone equally tempered) system. More about the theory of equal temperament is 
[here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Equal_temperament). 

Next, we factor N and store the factors in an array. For example, if N=12, we would have the array {2,2,3}. We then "prune" the array to remove duplicates (in 12-TET this now
leaves us with {2,3}). Next, we check if any power of these numbers is less than half of N. We store these new numbers in an array of arrays. For 12-TET, this gives us 
{{2,4},{3}}. Another example may be helpful. Suppose N=24. The process looks like 24->{2,2,2,3}->{2,3}->{{2,4,8},{3,9}}. 

Next, we use a heuristic to choose a pair of these numbers, picking one number from the first array and another number from the second. I have three heuristics in the code. 
If the heuristic is "scalar," we choose the smallest numbers. In 24-TET, we would pick 2 and 3. The next is "intermediate," where we choose from the middle of the lists 
(rounding down in the case of an even-length list). In 24-TET, this gives us {4,3}. Finally, we have the "chordal" heuristic which picks the largest numbers from each array 
(8 and 9 in 24-TET). 

In the case that our number can be factored into 3 distinct primes, we use the "meta-heuristic" to pick which factors to consider. The easiest example is N=30 (30=2X3X5). 
The process is like this: 30->{2,3,5}->{2,3,5}->{{2,4,8},{3,6,9},{5}}. At this point, we use the meta-heuristic to choose which of these arrays to pass to the heuristic. This 
process works pretty similarly, returning either the 2 smallest factors, the 2 largest factors, or the smallest and largest factors. 



## Functionality (How the sound gets to you)
As it stands, the sound engine behind the user interface is based on classic analog polyphonic synthesizers. Every time that a key is pressed, 
one of the internal oscillators is assigned a note value, and is added to the list of notes that are audible. This is the beginning of a 
chain of digital sound processing that ends in the computer speakers. 

First, the raw audio from the oscillator goes into an amplifier that is controlled by the "Amp Envelope." When a key is pressed, it triggers the Attack and Decay
stages of the envelope, and sustains at the level of the "sustain" slider until the key is released, triggering the Release phase. This behavior
is common to all ADSR envelopes (further reading [here](https://support.apple.com/guide/logicpro/attack-decay-sustain-and-release-lgsife419620/mac)). After passing the 
amplifier, the sound is processed by a digital [low-pass filter](https://mynewmicrophone.com/audio-eq-what-is-a-low-pass-filter-how-do-lpfs-work/)
which has its own independent ADSR envelope that is triggered on every keypress. It will remain at its 
sustain level until every key is released. The filter envelope can be disabled by pressing the "on/off" button, which turns dark when the filter envelope is not enabled. 

The sound then passes into the effects section. First, the audio enters a stereo delay. By default, the delay is mono, but engaging the mono/stereo switch (where dark 
is stereo), the delay offers separate controls for the right and left audio channels. The user has control over feedback and the delay time. More information about 
the function of delay units can be found [here](https://www.teachmeaudio.com/mixing/equipment/effects/delay). The delay can be effectively bypassed by setting the feedback
control to the minimum, so no audio is fed back to the delay. Finally, the sound enters a convolution reverb with a dry-wet fader and control over the decay percent 
(essentially how much audio is fed through to the next echo) and the decay time (the characteristic time of an echo). Reverb is complicated, so I refer to the 
[p5 documentation](https://p5js.org/reference/#/p5.Reverb) as to how their reverb works. Finally, the audio is piped out to the computer, and the operating system 
takes care of sending the audio to the listener


<!--
## Installation

Use the package manager [pip](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/) to install foobar.

```bash
pip install foobar
```

## Usage

```python
import foobar

# returns 'words'
foobar.pluralize('word')

# returns 'geese'
foobar.pluralize('goose')

# returns 'phenomenon'
foobar.singularize('phenomena')
```

## Contributing
Pull requests are welcome. For major changes, please open an issue first to discuss what you would like to change.

Please make sure to update tests as appropriate.

## License
[MIT](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/mit/)
-->

Commit message:

Ugh
Christ almighty this is impossible to explain now

README.md, after:

# Grid_Synth
Driver code for a web-based synthesizer written in p5.js

## Using the app
As it stands, this application has been tested on both Google Chrome and Microsoft Edge browsers. In theory, any web browset that supports the
[Web Audio API](https://caniuse.com/audio-api) and [P5.js](https://github.com/processing/p5.js/blob/main/contributor_docs/supported_browsers.md)
should be able to use the application without problems. 

## Controls
The application supports several user interactions. 
#### PLAYING NOTES 
Pressing any key on your computer keyboard will trigger a note. On the top row, keys from "1" to "=" will work, on the second, "q" to "]", on the third, 
"a" to "'", and on the fourth, "z" to "/". The layout of a typical keyboard makes playing notes somewhat annoying, so if you have an ortholinear 
keyboard, definitely break it out here. 
#### FILTER CONTROLS
Pressing the space bar will trigger the filter envelope manually (as will playing a note while the envelope is engaged). Additionally, the arrow keys control 
filter parameters - up/down control the cutoff and left/right control the resonance (left is less, right is more). 
#### OTHER CONTROLS
Sliders can be used to control the ADSR envelopes attached to the amp and filter, as well as the effects. The user can also use dropdown menus to select the core
waveform of the synthesizer, as well as change the fundamental pitch (the pitch of the note which bears the label "0")in an input box. The other inputs are for the 
cardinality (the number of tones to the octave), and the "harmonicity" and "metaharmonicity" of the system, which are terms that bear some explanation in the next section. 

## What in god's name is going on here??
In this section, I will outline the basic algorithm for deciding which frequency is being played by an oscillator when a user hits a key on the keyboard. The 
following explanation does very little to engage with *why* the operations are taking place, but this will be adressed in an upcoming thesis in the Dartmouth 
department of music. 

First off, the code checks what the number in the "cardinality" input box is (we'll call it N), and splits the interval from the fundamental frequency 
to the note an octave above it into N equally-spaced intervals. This creates an N-TET (N-tone equally tempered) system. More about the theory of equal temperament is 
[here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Equal_temperament). 

Next, we factor N and store the factors in an array. For example, if N=12, we would have the array {2,2,3}. We then "prune" the array to remove duplicates (in 12-TET this now
leaves us with {2,3}). Next, we check if any power of these numbers is less than half of N. We store these new numbers in an array of arrays. For 12-TET, this gives us 
{{2,4},{3}}. Another example may be helpful. Suppose N=24. The process looks like 24->{2,2,2,3}->{2,3}->{{2,4,8},{3,9}}. 

Next, we use a heuristic to choose a pair of these numbers, picking one number from the first array and another number from the second. I have three heuristics in the code. 
If the heuristic is "scalar," we choose the smallest numbers. In 24-TET, we would pick 2 and 3. The next is "intermediate," where we choose from the middle of the lists 
(rounding down in the case of an even-length list). In 24-TET, this gives us {4,3}. Finally, we have the "chordal" heuristic which picks the largest numbers from each array 
(8 and 9 in 24-TET). 

In the case that our number can be factored into 3 distinct primes, we use the "meta-heuristic" to pick which factors to consider. The easiest example is N=30 (30=2X3X5). 
The process is like this: 30->{2,3,5}->{2,3,5}->{{2,4,8},{3,6,9},{5}}. At this point, we use the meta-heuristic to choose which of these arrays to pass to the heuristic. This 
process works pretty similarly, returning either the 2 smallest factors, the 2 largest factors, or the smallest and largest factors. 

The code then uses the two numbers that have been returned from this process to create a grid of frequency values. Along the right, the frequency increases in increments 
decided by the first factor, and as we travel up, the increments depend on the second factor. Every note's frequency is calculated as 2^(n/N), where N is the cardinality 
of the system and n is (r x f1)+(l x f2), where r is the number of rightwards steps, l is the number of leftwards steps, and f1 and f2 are the first and second factors. 

The theory as to *why* this is being done would not fit in a GitHub readme, but it has to do with the Tonnetz of Neo-Riemannian harmony. Perhaps the reader can figure out why 
this connection can be made by noting that the "chordal" grid in 12-TET is an exact copy of the [Tonnetz](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tonnetz) if one ignores the triangles 
superimposed by theorists who are very concerned about triads :)



## Functionality (How the sound gets to you)
As it stands, the sound engine behind the user interface is based on classic analog polyphonic synthesizers. Every time that a key is pressed, 
one of the internal oscillators is assigned a note value, and is added to the list of notes that are audible. This is the beginning of a 
chain of digital sound processing that ends in the computer speakers. 

First, the raw audio from the oscillator goes into an amplifier that is controlled by the "Amp Envelope." When a key is pressed, it triggers the Attack and Decay
stages of the envelope, and sustains at the level of the "sustain" slider until the key is released, triggering the Release phase. This behavior
is common to all ADSR envelopes (further reading [here](https://support.apple.com/guide/logicpro/attack-decay-sustain-and-release-lgsife419620/mac)). After passing the 
amplifier, the sound is processed by a digital [low-pass filter](https://mynewmicrophone.com/audio-eq-what-is-a-low-pass-filter-how-do-lpfs-work/)
which has its own independent ADSR envelope that is triggered on every keypress. It will remain at its 
sustain level until every key is released. The filter envelope can be disabled by pressing the "on/off" button, which turns dark when the filter envelope is not enabled. 

The sound then passes into the effects section. First, the audio enters a stereo delay. By default, the delay is mono, but engaging the mono/stereo switch (where dark 
is stereo), the delay offers separate controls for the right and left audio channels. The user has control over feedback and the delay time. More information about 
the function of delay units can be found [here](https://www.teachmeaudio.com/mixing/equipment/effects/delay). The delay can be effectively bypassed by setting the feedback
control to the minimum, so no audio is fed back to the delay. Finally, the sound enters a convolution reverb with a dry-wet fader and control over the decay percent 
(essentially how much audio is fed through to the next echo) and the decay time (the characteristic time of an echo). Reverb is complicated, so I refer to the 
[p5 documentation](https://p5js.org/reference/#/p5.Reverb) as to how their reverb works. Finally, the audio is piped out to the computer, and the operating system 
takes care of sending the audio to the listener. 


<!--
## Installation

Use the package manager [pip](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/) to install foobar.

```bash
pip install foobar
```

## Usage

```python
import foobar

# returns 'words'
foobar.pluralize('word')

# returns 'geese'
foobar.pluralize('goose')

# returns 'phenomenon'
foobar.singularize('phenomena')
```

## Contributing
Pull requests are welcome. For major changes, please open an issue first to discuss what you would like to change.

Please make sure to update tests as appropriate.

## License
[MIT](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/mit/)
-->
